en,bio,11
11.1. Human Physiology
11.1.1. Controller and Trimmer System, Sensory Organs
Key Concepts: diabetes, sensory organs, effector, endocrine glands, feedback, hormones, impulse, neuron, reflex, synapse technology
11.1.1.1. Explains the structure, function and operation of nervous system.
a. Nerve tissue is indicated. According to their structure, neuron types are not mentioned.
b. It is emphasized that the pulse transmission is electrical and chemical.
c. Nervous system is given as central and peripheral nervous system. By explaining the functions of the anterior brain (end and intermediate brain), middle brain and posterior brain (pons, spinal cord, cerebellum) briefly for the brain which is one of the parts of central nervous system, it is mentioned of brain’s tasks and bottom structure. The reflex is explained by the tasks of spinal cord and the importance of reflex for human life is emphasized.
ç. General characteristics of somatic and autonomic nervous system are given in the peripheral nervous system. The discrimination of the sympathetic nerves and parasympathetic nerves are not mentioned.
d. While processing the structure of central and peripheral nervous system, the visual objects (photos, pictures, drawings, cartoons and graphic organizers (concept maps, mind maps, diagrams, etc.), e-learning objects and applications (animation, video, simulation, infographic, augmented and virtual reality applications, etc.) are used.
e. A reading article about Ibn Sina's studies on human physiology is given.
11.1.1.2. Explains endocrine glands and hormones secreted by these glands.
a. While endocrine glands and hormones secreted by these glands, the visual objects, graphic organizers, editors, e-learning objects and applications are used.
b. The hormones’ structure are not mentioned.
c. Examples of homeostasis (the body temperature regulates the calcium in blood and glucose ratio) are described.
ç. The effects of hormones on quality of life can be discussed through a sample disease.
11.1.1.3. Gives examples of nervous system disorders.
a. It focuses on multiple sclerosis (MS), Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, epilepsy (epilepsy), depression.
b. It is provided that the researches made on the technological developments related to the treatment of nervous system disorders.
c. Mahmut Gazi Yaşargil's studies are mentioned.
11.1.1.4. It is made an inference for the protection of healthy structure of the nervous system.
11.1.1.5. Explains the structure and functioning of sensory organs.
a. When the skin is indicated, the epithelium and basic connective tissue are briefly explained. b. The structure of sense organs is explained by showing on the diagram.
c. When the structure of sense organs are explained, the visual elements, graphic editors, e- learning object and applications are used.
ç. The eyeball parts are given as hard layer, vein layer, mesh layer and not entered into detailed structures. Ear sections are given as outer ear, middle ear and inner ear and not entered into their detailed structures.
d. Ibn Heysem's studies regarding eye is emphasized.
11.1.1.6. Explains the sensory organs disorders.
a. It is provided that the color blindness, myopia, hyperopia, astigmatism, hearing loss and loss of balance disorders to be researched and presented.
b. It is provided to organize social awareness events (projects, public spots, brochures, etc.) on the grounds that to draw attention to the problems faced by visually and hearing impaired people and make people around them conscious.
11.1.1.7. It is made interference of requirements of the protection of the healthy structure of the sense organs inferences. Research on technological developments related to the treatment of sensory organs disorders is provided.
11.1.2. Support and Motion System
Key Concepts: joint, muscle, bone, cartilage, tendon
11.1.2.1. Explains the structure, task and operation of support and movement system.
a. The bone, cartilage and muscle tissue are explained.
b. When the structure of support and motion system are explained, the visual elements, graphic editors, e-learning object and their applications are used.
c. Bone and muscle types are explained.
d. Examples of where the cartilage and joints are located in body are given. Their structures are not a topic here.
11.1.2.2. Explains support and movement system disorders. It is provided to research and share the disorders of injuries, dislocations, sprains, meniscus and joint.
11.1.2.3. It is inferenced of the requirements of the protection of the healthy structure of the support and movement system. The importance of sport, nutrition and proper posture in terms of the health of the support and movement system is discussed.
11.1.3. Digestive system
Key Concepts: absorption, digestion
11.1.3.1. Describes the structure, function and operation of the digestive system.
a. When the digestive system is explained, the visual elements, graphic editors, e-learning object and applications are used.
b. The functions of the digestive organs and organs (liver, pancreas and salivary glands) are emphasized. Their structures are not a topic on this course.
11.1.3.2. Explains the digestive system disorders. Examples of reflux, gastritis, ulcers, hemorrhoids, constipation, diarrhea are given.
11.1.3.3. It is inferenced of the requirements to protect the digestive system.
a. It is indicated that physical activities have a positive effect on the digestive system’s health.
b. The importance of cleanness of consumed foods, natural nutrition with fiber-rich foods are emphasized.
c. It is ensured that the effects of the consumption of acidic beverages and fast-food nutrition on the digestive system are discussed.
ç. The effects of antibiotic use on intestinal flora and the harms of unconscious antibiotic use are indicated.
11.1.4. Circulatory Systems
Key Concepts: red blood cells, white blood cells, antigen, antibody, vaccine, immunity, vessel, infection, interferon, heart, blood, blood donation, blood circulation, blood type, lymph circulation, pulse, edema, blood pressure
11.1.4.1. Explains the structure, functions and functions of heart, blood and blood vessels.
a. The tissue of blood is described.
b. When circulatory system is explained, the visual elements, graphic editors, e-learning object, and applications are used.
c. Factors affecting the work of the heart (adrenaline, thyroxine, caffeine, teine, acetylcholine, vagus nerve) are explained.
ç. Red blood cells, white blood cells and blood flakes are emphasized. The white blood cells are restricted with B and T lymphocytes.
d. It focuses on blood groups. The necessity of taking blood from their own group in blood transfusions are indicated. The concepts of general donor are not used in blood transfusions.
e. It is provided that the students make studies (brochure, public spot, survey, etc.) to raise awareness about the importance of blood and bone marrow donation work.
f. Models and analogies are used during the processing of the subject.
g. Ibn Nefs's views on circulation are emphasized.
11.1.4.2. Explains lymph circulation.
a. The visual elements, graphic editors, e-learning object applications are used when the lymph circulation is explained.
b. It is explained by the circulation of the lymph is associated with blood circulation. c. The edema formation is emphasized.
ç. The relationship between lymphatic circulation and immunity is explained. 11.1.4.3. Explains the circulatory system disorders. Heart attack, vascular occlusion, high blood pressure, varicose veins, gangrene, anemia and leukemia diseases are emphasized.
11.1.4.4. In order to maintain the healthy structure of the circulatory system, the inferences regarding the necessities are made.
11.1.4.5. Explains the types of immune and natural defence mechanisms of the body.
a. The roles of skin, saliva, stomach juice, mucus and tears for the body defence against diseases and foreign substances are exemplified.
b. The relationship between immune and infections and allergy is explained by examples. c. Immunoglobulins are not mentioned.
ç. The importance of vaccination is emphasized. The reasons of that some vaccines should be replaced over time are investigated.
d. Due to the rapid change of genetic structures of disease-causing organisms, it is highlighted that they pose a threat to human health.
11.1.5. Respiratory system
Key Concepts: alveolar, bronchial, diaphragm, gas transport, hemoglobin, respiration
11.1.5.1. Explains the structure, function and operation of respiratory system.
a. When the structure of the respiratory system is explained, the visual elements, graphic editors, e-learning object, and application are used.
b. The mechanism of breathing is explained through graphics.
11.1.5.2. Explains gas transport from alveoli to tissues and tissues to alveoli.
11.1.5.3. Gives examples of respiratory system diseases. The diseased of COPD, asthma, tuberculosis, lung and throat cancer, pneumonia are indicated.
11.1.5.4. It is interfered for protecting the healthy structure of the respiratory system. It is provided that the measures to be taken regarding the subject of health and safety and the information obtained to be shared for the protection against occupational respiratory diseases that are frequently seen.
11.1.6. Urinary System
Key Concepts: kidney, kidney structure, kidney transplantation, dialysis, bladder, nephron, ureter, urethra
11.1.6.1. Explains the structure, function and operation of urinary system.
a. When urinary system is explained, the visual structure of the urinary system, graphic organizers, e-learning object and applications are used.
b. The effect of kidney on red blood cell production is emphasized.
c. Kidney dissection is used to examine the structure of the kidney.
11.1.6.2. Indicates the role of kidneys in the provision of homeostasis.
11.1.6.3. Gives examples of urinary system disorders.
a. Kidney stone, kidney failure, urinary tract infection is indicated.
b. The dialysis is briefly explained and it is emphasized that the problems experienced by dialysis-dependent patients and the importance of donation.
11.1.6.4. In order to maintain the healthy structure of the urinary system, the requirements are indicated.
11.1.7. Reproductive System and Embryonic Development
Key Concepts: growth, embryonic development, development, pregnancy, invitro fertilization, menstrual cycle, ultrasound, reproduction
11.1.7.1. Explains the structure, function and operation of reproductive system.
a. The visual elements, graphic organizers, e-learning object and applications are used while the structure of male and female reproductive system is explained.
b. Graphs related to hormones regulating the menstrual cycle are included.
c. In vitro fertilization methods are briefly described.
11.1.7.2. In order to protect the healthy structure of the reproductive system, the requirements are made inferences about.
11.1.7.3. Explains the process of embryonic development in human beings.
a. Organs consisting of embryonic layers are not given.
b. Factors affecting the development of the baby in pregnancy (including antibiotics, drug use during the period, intense stress, folic acid deficiency, X-ray exposure) are indicated.
c. The importance of monitoring the pregnancy in terms of the health of the baby and mother is emphasized.
11.2. Community and Population Ecology
11.2.1. Community Ecology
Key Concepts: biodiversity, ecosystem, community, competition, symbiotic relationship, succession
11.2.1.1. Explains the factors affecting the structure of the community. It is emphasized that the biodiversity contained in the communities is latitude in terrestrial ecosystems and in aquatic ecosystems water depth and water pollution.
11.2.1.2. Explains the competition between species and in one specie in the community with examples. The relationship between hunt and hunter is emphasized.
11.2.1.3. Explains the symbiotic relationships between species in the community with examples. Parasitism and mutualism are associated with human health (lice, fleas, ticks, tapeworm, intestinal flora).
11.2.1.4. Explains the succession of the communities with examples. The stages of succession are not mentioned.
11.2.2. Population Ecology
Key Concepts: population dynamics, carrying capacity, age pyramid
11.2.2.1. Analyses the factors affecting population dynamics.
a. Focuses on human age pyramids.
b. Different growth curves (S and J) are plotted for population growth.
c. Analysis of the population changes in the world and in our country through the graphs and their possible results discussion is provided.
