en,bio,12
12.1. From Gene to Protein
12.1.1. The Discovery and Importance of Nucleic Acids
Key Concepts: DNA ligase, DNA polymerase, gene, helicase, chromosome, nucleic acid, nucleotide, DNA replication
12.1.1.1. Summarizes the process of discovery of nucleic acids. Rosalind Franklin, James Watson, Francis Crick's studies are briefly described but memorization of these names and chronological order are not expected to be known.
12.1.1.2. Explains the types and functions of nucleic acids.
12.1.1.3. Establishes the whole relationship of the genetic material in the cell.
a. Modelling of genetic material organization from DNA and chromosome from nucleotides is provided.
b. The relationship between gene and DNA is emphasized.
12.1.1.4. Explains the self-replication of DNA.
a. Enzymes other than helicase, DNA polymerase and DNA ligase are not given.
b. Aziz Sancar's contribution to biology science, a reading article regarding his patriotism and general characteristics of a scientist is given..
12.1.2. Genetic Password and Protein Synthesis
Key Concepts: antibiotics, anticodon, bioethics, biosafety, biotechnology, DNA fingerprint, gene therapy, genetics code, genetic counselling, genetic engineering, insulin, cloning, code, codon, stem cell, model organism, RNA polymerase, protein synthesis, transcription, translation, artificial tissue / organ
12.1.2.1. Explains the mechanism of protein synthesis.
a. The relationship between genetic code and protein synthesis is emphasized.
b. While explaining protein synthesis, the visual elements, graphic organizers, e-learning object and applications are used.
12.1.2.2. Explains the concepts of genetic engineering and biotechnology. The discussion of the differences between genetic engineering and biotechnology is provided.
12.1.2.3. Explains genetic engineering and biotechnology applications.
a. It is provided to research and share the results of the gene technologies, DNA fingerprint analysis, stem cell technologies and their using areas.
b. The properties of the model organisms are discussed.
c. The examples of the use of model organisms in genetic and biotechnological research are given.
12.1.2.4. It is evaluated the effect of the genetic engineering and biotechnology applications to human life.
a. The vaccine, antibiotic, insulin, interferon production, cancer treatment and gene therapy applications are briefly explained.
b. The possible consequences of changing the genetics of organisms and cloning studies are indicated. Ian Wilmut's studies on cloning are mentioned.
c. It is provided to discuss the biosafety and bioethics.
ç. It is emphasized that socio-economic and cultural context influences the development of biology.
12.2. Energy Transformations in Living Beings. 12.2.1. Vitality and Energy
Key Concepts: ATP, energy, energy conversion, phosphorylation, photosynthesis, cellular respiration, chemosynthesis.
12.2.1.1. Explains the necessity of energy for the continuity of being alive.
a. Describes the structure of the ATP molecule.
b. Phosphorylation types are briefly mentioned.
12.2.2. Photosynthesis
Key Concepts: photosynthesis, photolysis, light, chlorophyll, chloroplast
12.2.2.1. Questions the importance of photosynthesis for living things. Examples of scientists who contribute to the understanding of the process of photosynthesis are given and their studies briefly are mentioned.
12.2.2.2. Explains the process of photosynthesis on the scheme.
a. The structure of chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b is not given.
b. The photolysis of water is indicated.
c. The light-dependent and light-independent reactions are compared in terms of product. The steps of the reactions are not mentioned and the mathematical calculations are not included.
ç. CAM and C4 plants are not indicated.
d. The process of photosynthesis is explained by using visual elements, graphic organizers, e- learning object and applications.
12.2.2.3. Evaluates the factors affecting the photosynthesis rate.
a. The intensity of light, the wavelength of light, temperature, chlorophyll’s amount and density of carbon dioxide which are affecting the speed of photosynthesis are given.
b. The scientific method steps are used when conducting controlled experiments on the factors affecting the rate of photosynthesis.
c. The research of artificial lighting applications in increasing the amount of agricultural products and sharing conclusions are provided.
12.2.3. Chemosynthesis
Key Concepts: chemosynthesis, oxidation
12.2.3.1 Explains the phenomenon of chemosynthesis.
a. Examples of living creatures making chemosynthesis are given.
b. It is summarized that chemosynthesis’s contributions to the substance cycle and its use in industrial areas.
12.2.4. Cellular Respiration
Key Concepts: fermentation, glycolysis, mitochondria, oxygenated respiration, cellular respiration, Krebs cycle, oxygen-free respiration
12.2.4.1. Explains cellular respiration.
a. Oxygen respiration is told as glycolysis, Krebs cycle and ETS-oxidative phosphorylation.
b. NADH, FADH2, ATP production and consumption in reactions are given without mathematical calculations.
c. It is emphasized that in all living things, glucose is broken down into pyruvic acid by a chain of reactions. Pyruvic the intermediate steps and intermediates up to the acid are not mentioned.
ç. Ethyl alcohol-lactic acid fermentation is explained and examples from daily life are given.
d. In oxygen-free respiration, the electron is transferred to a molecule (sulfate, sulfur, nitrate, carbon dioxide, iron) other than oxygen.
e. It is focused on the causes of energy efficiency being higher in aerobic respiration than fermentation.
f. The cellular breathing processes are explained by using the visual elements, graphic organizers, e-learning object and applications.
12.2.4.2. Makes experiments regarding the products get reacted in the aerobic respiration and the products consisted at the end of reaction.
12.2.4.3 It is made inferences related to relationship between photosynthesis and respiration.
a. The importance of photosynthesis and respiration in ensuring the balance of matter and energy in nature is highlighted.
b. It is provided to design and made experiments in which photosynthesis and respiratory events can be observed together.
c. The kemiosmotic view of the mechanism of energy generation in photosynthesis and oxygen respiration briefly introduced on the schema.
12.3. Plant Biology
12.3.1. Structure of plants
Key Concepts: photoperiodism, nasti, auxin, tropism, end meristem, lateral meristem, age rings
12.3.1.1. Explains the structure and functions of basic parts of a flowering plant.
a. Root, stem, leaf sections of the main tissues are examined and their tasks are explained.
b. The role of end and lateral meristems in growth is emphasized and the connection with age rings is established.
c. Prokambium, protoderm and basic meristem issues are not told.
ç. The examples are told regarding the plants which of others taking advantages of their roots, stems and leaves.
d. It is ensured that the students share photographs regarding the plant varieties through an educational social network.
12.3.1.2. Explains the effect of hormones on plant development with examples.
12.3.1.3. Performs a controlled experiment to observe plant movements.
a. By observing Nasti and tropism movements, it is provided that the observations on these movements are shared.
b. The effect of auxin on tropism is emphasized.
12.3.2. Transport of Substance in Plants
Key Concepts: adhesion, pressure flow theory, phloem, gutation, fertilizer, cohesion stress theory, root pressure, xylem, mycorrhiza, minimum rule, nodule, stoma, perspiration
12.3.2.1. Explains water and mineral absorption in roots.
a. The importance of water and minerals for plants is emphasized.
b. The removal of minerals from the soil, the formation of nodules and mycorrhizae are emphasized.
c. Absorption mechanism of ions is not entered.
ç. The names of the minerals that are necessary for the growth and development of plants are given. Their tasks are not told.
12.3.2.2. Explains the water and mineral transport mechanism in plants.
a. The cohesion stress theory, root pressure, adhesion and gutation phenomena are explained.
b. The role of stomas in transporting water is mentioned.
12.3.2.3. Explains the transport mechanism of photosynthesis products in plants.
12.3.2.4. Designs experiments on water and material transport in plants.
12.3.3. Sexual Reproduction in Plants
Key Concepts: flower, germination, dormancy, fertilization, fruit, seed, pollination, reproductive cells
12.3.3.1. Describes the parts of the flower and the tasks of these parts.
12.3.3.2. Explains fertilization in flowering plants, seed and fruit formation.
a. Sexual reproduction of plants in a plant sample editors are explained by using visual objects, e-learning object and applications.
b. The role of seed and fruit in the reproduction and propagation of plants is handled with examples.
12.3.3.3. Designs an experiment to observe seed germination. The factors affecting germination are determined.
12.3.3.4. Establishes the relationship between dormancy and germination.
12.4. Living Beings and Environment
12.4.1. Living Beings and Environment
Key Concepts: adaptation, natural selection, mutation, variation, artificial selection
12.4.1.1. Explains the effect of environmental conditions on the continuity of genetic changes.
a. The concepts of variation, adaptation, mutation, natural and artificial selection are emphasized.
b. The reasons for the development of resistance of bacteria to antibiotics are emphasized.
c. The reasons for the loss of effects of herbicides and pesticides over time are emphasized.
12.4.1.2. Gives examples of artificial selection practices in agriculture and animal husbandry.
