en,mat,11
11.1. (GEOMETRY) Trigonometry
11.1.1. Directional Angles
Terms and Concepts: directional angle, degree, minute, second, radian, basic measure
Symbols and representations: 𝑅, ′, ′ ′,  ̊
11.1.1.1. Explain the directional angle.
11.1.1.2. Relates the angle measurement units to each other.
a) The minutes and seconds are the sub units of the degree.
b) Relate the degree to the radian;
c) The main dimension of the angle.
11.1.2. Trigonometric Functions
Terms and Concepts: trigonometric function, period, periodic function
Symbols and representations: sinx, cosx, tanx, cotx, cosecx, secx, arcsinx, arccosx, arctanx, T, f (x + t)
11.1.2.1. Explains trigonometric functions by unit circle.
a) Basic identities between trigonometric functions are examined with the help of similar triangles created.
b) Signs of trigonometric functions according to regions are examined.
c) Trigonometric functions are ordered according to their angle values.
11.1.2.2. Solve problems related to the cosine theorem.
a) Cosine theorem, obtained by using the Pythagorean Theorem.
b) Real life problems are included.
11.1.2.3. Solve problems related to sinus theorem.
a) The sinus theorem, the length of the two sides and the angle between these edges is obtained by taking the area of the given triangle into account.
b) The sinus theorem is not associated with the circumference.
c) Real life problems are included.
11.1.2.4. Draws trigonometric function graphs.
a) Only the information and communication technologies are used in the graphical drawings of functions other than y = sinx and y = cosx functions.
b) Periodic function definition is given, trigonometric functions are shown to be periodic.
c) With the help of graphs, trigonometric functions are determined as single or double functions. d) Charts of secant and cosecant functions are not included.
11.1.2.5. Explains inverse functions of sine, cosine and tangent functions.
Graphs of inverse trigonometric functions are not included.
11.2. Analytical Geometry
11.2.1. Analytical Investigation of Straight
Terms and Concepts: analytical plane, distance between two points, slope of the line, slope angle, parallel of two lines, steepness of two lines
Symbols and representations: A(x,y), I AB I, m, d1//d2 ...
11.2.1.1. Solve problems by obtaining the relationship between two points in the analytical plane.
11.2.1.2. Calculates the coordinates of the point that divides a line in a certain ratio (inside or outside).
a) Find the coordinates of the center point of a line.
b) Find the coordinates of the center of gravity of a triangle.
11.2.1.3. Analyzes the lines in the analytical plane.
a) The inclination angle and slope of a line are defined.
b) The equation of a line is created on the analytical plane.
c) The equations of the equations which are parallel to the axes and passing through the origin are found and the graphs of the equations found are interpreted.
ç) The conditions of the two lines are examined and there is an intersection point of the two intersecting lines.
d) Information and communication technologies are used.
11.2.1.4. Calculates the distance of a point to a line.
a) Applications are made about the distance of a point to a line and the distance between two parallel lines.
11.3. (NUMBERS AND ALGEBRA) Practices on Functions
11.3.1. Practices regarding Functions
Terms and Concepts: average change rate
11.3.1.1. Solve the problem using the graph and table representation of the function.
a) The points where the graph crosses the x and y axes; ranges in which the function is positive, negative, increasing and decreasing; maximum and minimum values of the function and their meaning in the context of the given situation.
b) The average rate of change of a given range of a function given by algebraic expression, graph or table is calculated.
c) The graph of the function is drawn and interpreted with the help of information and communication technologies.
11.3.2. Secondary Functions and Graphics
Terms and Concepts: quadratic function, vertex, parabola, axis of symmetry
Symbols and Impressions: y=ax2 + bx + c, y = a(x-r)2 + k, y = a(x-x1).(x-x2)
11.3.2.1. Interprets the function of a quadratic variable.
a) The peak of the graph of the function, the points where the axes cut, and the axis of symmetry are found.
b) The peak or maximum value of the function is associated with the peak of the graph of the function.
c) The effect of the change in the coefficients of the function on the graph of the function is interpreted by using information and communication technologies.
ç) The second order function is created with three points, one of which is given a two point or one on the y axis.
d) The conditions of a right and a parabola are examined.
11.3.2.2. Solve the problems that can be modeled by second order functions.
11.3.3. Transformations of Functions
Terms and Concepts: translation, symmetry, transformation
11.3.3.1. Draws new function graphs with the help of transformations from the graph of a function.
a) The symmetry properties of the graph of single and double functions are emphasized.
b) The graphics of transformations of 𝑦=𝑓(x)+𝑏,𝑦=𝑓(𝐴−𝑎),𝑦=𝑘 𝑓(x),𝑦=𝑓(𝑘x),𝑦=−𝑓(x),𝑦=𝑓(−x) are given by using information and communication technologies.
11.4. (NUMBERS AND ALGEBRA) Equation and Inequality Systems
11.4.1. Second Order Systems with Two Unknown Equations
11.4.1.1. He / she finds the solution set of systems of equations with two unknowns.
The solution is interpreted with the help of graphs drawn from information and communication technologies.
11.4.2. Secondary Inequalities and Inequality Systems
Terms and Concepts: second order inequalities
11.4.2.1. Finds a solution set of inequalities of a second degree.
a) Find the solution set of the inequalities given in the form of the product as multiplication or division of ax + b or ax2 + bx + c.
b) The solution is interpreted with the help of graphs drawn from information and communication technologies.
11.4.2.2. Finds a set of solutions of systems of inequality of a second degree.
11.5. (GEOMETRY) Circle and Circular Region
11.5.1. Basic Elements of Circle
Terms and Concepts: circle, center, radius, diameter, beam, tangent, cutter, bow
11.5.1.1. Explain the tangent, beam, diameter, bow and cut. The situations of a circle and a line relative to each other are discussed.
11.5.1.2. Perform the operations by showing the properties of the beam in the circle.
a) In a circle, it is shown that the middle post of the beam passes through the center of the circle and the line connecting the midpoint of a beam to the center of the circle is perpendicular to the beam.
b) The relationship between the length of the beams and their distance to the center is emphasized in a circle.
11.5.2. Angles in Circles
Terms and Concepts: center angle, perimeter angle, tangent-beam angle, inner angle, external angle
11.5.2.1. The center, environment, interior, exterior and tangent-beam angles using the properties of the operations.
a) Circular circle of the triangle is drawn.
b) The relation of the sinus theorem with the radius of the circumference circle is emphasized.
c) Use of the compass-ruler or information and communication technologies.
11.5.3. Tangent in the Circle
Terms and Concepts: tangent, tangent part
11.5.3.1. Show the properties of the tangent in the circle operations.
a) The tangent parts drawn from a point outside the circle are shown to have equal lengths. b) The inner tangent and outer tangent circles of the triangle are drawn.
c) The common tangent of the two circles is not entered.
ç) With the help of information and communication technologies, a circle and two tangents from a point outside this circle are drawn and the situation that is taken by dragging the point taken is taken into consideration.
11.5.4. Circle and Area
Terms and Concepts: arc length, circle, circle slice
11.5.4.1. Creates environment and area relations of the circle.
a) Applications are made about the area and area of the circle.
b) Applications are made by finding the area and arc length relations of the circle segment.
c) The work of Archimedes is given.
ç) Real life problems are included.
11.6. Solid Geometry
11.6.1. Solid Objects
Terms and Concepts: upright circular cylinder, upright circular cone, sphere, main line, vertex
11.6.1.1. Sphere, perpendicular circular cylinder and perpendicular circular cone to create space and volume relations.
a) Real life problems are included.
b) Information and communication technologies are used.
11.7. (DATA, COUNTING AND PROBABILITY) Probability
11.7.1. Conditional Probability
Terms and Concepts: conditional probability, dependent event, independent event, compound event
Symbols and representations: P (A | B), P (A veB), P (AUB)
11.7.1.1. Solves problems by explaining the conditional probability.
a) Historical development process of probability is mentioned.
b) Real life problems are included.
11.7.1.2. Explains the probability of realization by explaining dependent and independent events.
Real life problems are included.
11.7.1.3. Calculates the probability of occurrence by explaining the compound event.
a) Tree scheme is used.
b) The selection is made from a maximum of three stages of events.
c) Calculate the probability of events generated by “and, or”.
ç) Real life problems are included.
11.7.2. Experimental and Theoretical Probability
Terms and Concepts: experimental probability, theoretical probability
11.7.2.1. Correlates the theoretical probability with the theoretical possibility. Information and communication technologies are used.
