en,mat,12
12.1. (NUMBERS AND ALGEBRA) Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
12.1.1. Exponential Function
Terms and Concepts: exponential function
Symbols and Impressions: f(x)=ax
12.1.1.1. Explains the exponential function.
a) Explains why the exponential functions are needed.
b) Exponential expressions and the properties of the transactions made with them are reminded.
c) Exponential functions are shown one by one and with the help of graphic.
12.1.2. Logarithm Function
Terms and Concepts: logarithm function, natural logarithm
Symbols and Impressions: logx, logax, lnx, e, ex
12.1.2.1. Solve problems by associating the exponential function with the logarithm function.
a) The graph of logarithm function of a∈R+−{1} is plotted using the graph of the exponential function. The graphs of the functions of y=ax and y=log ax indicate that they are symmetrical with respect to the y = x line.
b) Information and communication technologies are used to examine the change in the graph of the logarithm function according to the values a.
c) The works of Gelenbevi İsmail Efendi and John Napier are included.
12.1.2.2. Solve problems by defining logarithm function at base 10 and e.
a) It is mentioned that the number of e is irrational and its use in mathematics and other sciences.
12.1.2.3. Use the properties of the logarithm function.
12.1.3. Exponential, Logarithmic Equations and Inequalities
Terms and Concepts: exponential equation, logarithmic equation
12.1.3.1. Explains the solution sets of exponential, logarithmic equations and inequalities.
12.1.3.2. Explain exponential and logarithmic functions to model real life situations.
a) The examples such as population growth, bacterial population, decay of radioactive substances (half-life), determination of fossil ages, earthquake intensity (Richter scale), pH value, volume (decibels) are mentioned.
b) Examples that will raise awareness about the concepts of waste and savings.
c) The information and communication technologies are used.
12.2. Sequence Progression
12.2.1. Real Number Arrays
Terms and Concepts: array, finite array, fixed array, arithmetic sequence, geometric sequence, Fibonacci sequence
12.2.1.1. Explain the concept of array by associating with the concept of function. The finite array is given the equality of constant arrays and arrays.
12.2.1.2. The general term or the reduction relation finds the terms of a given sequence of numbers.
12.2.1.3. Performs operations by using the properties of arithmetic and geometric arrays.
a) First n term sum is found.
b) The total symbol is introduced but the features are not given.
12.2.1.4. Solve problems with real life situations with the help of arrays. Arithmetic, geometric and Fibonacci sequences are given examples from nature and various art branches.
12.3. (GEOMETRY) Trigonometry
12.3.1. Total-Difference and Two-fold Angle Formulas
12.3.1.1. Performs operations by creating formulas of trigonometric values of sum and difference of two angles. Transformation and inverse transformation formulas are not given.
12.3.1.2. Makes operations by creating two-fold angle formulas.
12.3.2. Trigonometric Equations
Terms and Concepts: trigonometric equation
12.3.2.1. Find solution sets of trigonometric equations.
a) Being about a, b, c ∈R, the roots of trigonometric equations such as a sin f(x) + b cos g(x) = c are found; The solution with the coefficients a, b and c is associated.
b) Real life problems are included.
c) The work of El Battani is included.
12.4. (GEOMETRY) Transformations
12.4.1. Fundamental Transformations in the Analytical Plane
Terms and Concepts: transformation, translation, rotation, center of rotation, rotation angle, symmetry, center of symmetry, axis of symmetry
12.4.1.1. Finds the coordinates of the image of a given point in the analytic plane under translational, rotational and symmetry transformations.
a) The concepts of translation, symmetry and rotation are reminded.
b) the point; point, axis, y = x line, symmetries according to a line and symmetry of the line according to the point are highlighted. The correct symmetries of the line are not included.
c) Displacement, symmetry and rotation with the help of information and communication technologies.
12.4.1.2. Solves the problem of basic transformations and components.
a) Modeling studies are included.
b) Sampling from nature and architectural works.
12.5. (NUMBERS AND ALGEBRA) Derivative
12.5.1. Limit and Continuity
Terms and Concepts: limit at one point, limit from right, limit from left, continuity
12.5.1.1. Explains the limit of a function at a point, the limit from the left and the right from the limit.
a) The concept of limit is explained with the help of tables and graphs, as an independent variable approaches a given number.
b) Information and communication technologies are used.
c) Cauchy's work is included.
12.5.1.2. Specifies the properties related to the limit and makes practices.
a) Limit practices including polynomials, rooted, exponential, and logarithmic and trigonometric functions are made.
b) Only the share of the limit can be removed by dividing the share and denominator factor.
12.5.1.3. Explain the continuity of a function at a point.
a) Find the points on the graph of the function which are continuous and discontinuous.
b) The historical development of the limit and the contributions of Salih Zeki to this field are mentioned.
c) Continuity applications are made with the help of information and communication technologies.
12.5.2. Instantaneous Change Rate and Derivative
Terms and Concepts: instantaneous change rate, slope of the tangent, derivative, derivative from right, derivative from left
a) The instantaneous change rate is explained by using physics and geometry models.
b) The relation between the derivative value of a given function at a point and the inclination of the tangent at that point is emphasized.
c) The relationship between the left-hand derivative and the right-hand derivative of a function at a point and the derivative.
ç) The derivative rules such as f(x)=c, f(x)=axn (a, c∈R, n∈Q)  are mentioned. Apart from this, the derivative rules of functions (including closed and parametric functions) are not included.
d) The work of Rolle is included.
12.5.2.2. Evaluates the differentiability of a function at a point and in a range.
a) It examines the requirements and requirements for a function to be derivative at one point.
b) The relationship between the points where the function is not derivative and its graph is established.
12.5.2.3. Performs operations with the help of the rules of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division of derivative two functions which can be differentiated.
12.5.2.4. The rule of the derivative of the two functions (chain rule) is made by making the derivative calculation.
12.5.3. Practices of derivative
Terms and Concepts: critical point, extreme point, absolute maximum, absolute minimum, local maximum, local minimum
12.5.3.1. Derivatives are determined by the help of derivative which decreases or decreases a function.
12.5.3.2. Specifies the absolute maximum and absolute minimum, local maximum, local minimum points of a function.
a) Using the information and communication technologies, graphic drawing is given and interpreted.
12.5.3.3. Graphs a function with the help of its derivative.
a) Graphical drawings are limited by polynomial functions.
b) Information and communication technologies are used.
12.5.3.4. Solves maximum and minimum problems with derivative help. Real life problems are included.
12.6. (NUMBERS AND ALGEBRA) Integral
12.6.1. Indefinite integral
Terms and concepts: inverse derivative, indefinite integral, integral constant
12.6.1.1. Defines the indefinite integral of a function and forms the rules of integration.
a) Being “n” is not equal to -1 as the rules of indeterminate integration are limited by the functions of f(x)=axn (a, c∈R, n∈Q)
b) Applications of a constant of a function, the sum and the difference of the two functions are given the rules of integration.
12.6.1.2. Performs integral process by changing the variable.
12.6.2. Specific Integrals and Applications
Terms and Concepts: Riemann sum, specific integral
12.6.2.1. Calculates the area of the boundary region between the graph of a function and the x-axis with the aid of the Riemann sum.
a) Realized fields encountered in real life and cannot be calculated with the formulas can be expressed as the limit of appropriate totals are explained.
b) Polynomial is limited to functions.
c) Information and communication technologies are used.
12.6.2.2. Explains the relationship between the specific and indefinite integrals of a function.
12.6.2.3. Perform operations using properties of definite integral.
a) Particular integral of the fragmentary functions are included.
12.6.2.4. Calculates area with definite integral.
a) The area of the limited area between the graphics of the two functions is calculated.
b) Real life problems are included.
c) Information and communication technologies are used.
12.7. (GEOMETRY) Analytical geometry
12.7.1. Analytical Investigation of Circles
Terms and Concepts: general equation of the circle, the standard equation of the circle
12.7.1.1. The center and its radius form the equation of the given circle.
a) The standard equation of the circle is x2+y2+Dx+Ey+F=0.
b) Shows in which cases the equation of Ax2+By2+Dx+Ey+F= 0 forms a circle.
c) Information and communication technologies are used.
12.7.1.2. Equations are given the correct condition of the circle and determine the status of each other.
a) There are intersection points if there is a correct circle.
b) Information and communication technologies are used.