en,sci,03
S.3.1. Chapter One
S.3.1.1. Discovers the shape of the earth. 
S.3.1.2. Prepares models about the shape of the earth. Opines the former ideas about the shape of the earth.
S.3.1.3. Apprehends that there are lands and water areas on the surface of the earth. 
S.3.1.4. Explains the atmosphere around the earth.
S.3.1.5. Compares lands and water areas on the surface of the earth by modelling.
S.3.1.6. Understands the importance of the chordotonal organs. No mention the structural details of the chordotonal organs. 
S.3.1.7. Explains main jobs of the chordotonal organs. Explains the relations between the chordotonal organs.
S.3.1.8. Explains the needs for the protections of the health of the chordotonal organs. No mention the illnesses of the chordotonal organs.
S.3.1.9. Observe and act on moving beings. Movement properties of assets; Characterized as fast, slow, rotating, swinging and changing direction
S.3.1.10. Observe the moving assets and express their movement characteristics.Characterized as fast, slow, rotating, swinging and changing direction.
S.3.1.11. He discovers that by pushing and pulling is a force.
S.3.1.12. Defines the force by observing the effects of pushing and pulling forces on moving and standing bodies.
S.3.1.13. Investigates the hazards of moving objects in daily life. A student running in the school corridor, a student who is standing in the situation that may occur, drivers lost control of the vehicle as a result of loss of life and property, avalanche, flood, etc. are given.
S.3.1.14. Investigates the dangers of moving objects in daily life.In the situations that a student is running in the school corridor crashes a student who is standing,drivers lost control of the vehicle as a result of loss of life and property, avalanche, flood, etc. Examples are given.
S.3.1.15. Explains the basic properties that characterize the substance by using the five senses organs.a) What characterizes matter; hardness / softness, flexibility /brittleness, color, odor, taste and rough / smooth conditions are mentioned. B)It is ensured that  discovering a surface is roughened or smoothed. c)It is provided to notice that  by bringing various examples that will appeal to the five senses. 
S.3.1.16. Argues that touching, looking, tasting and smelling some of the substances can harm the living body. A)Security measures that can be taken are determined with the students. B)Necessary safety measures are taken. 
S.3.1.17. 1.Takes responsibility for taking necessary security measures while working individually or in groups. 
S.3.1.18.  Classifies the substances in the environment according to their states. Gives examples of substances states from the daily life, not mentioning their structures such as fluidity, distances between patricles,etc.
S.3.1.19.  1.Classifies the substances in the environment according to their states.  Gives examples of substances states from the daily life, not mentioning their structures such as fluidity, distances between patricles,etc.
S.3.1.20. Concludes that there is a necessity of light in order to carry out a process.
S.3.1.21. Classifies the surrounding light sources into natural and artificial.
S.3.1.22. Classifies the surrounding light sources into natural and artificial.
S.3.1.23. Concludes that every sound has its source and can be transmitted everywhere. Concludes that by means of hearing one can determine the location of sound, approaching or moving away from the sound source.
S.3.1.24. Classifies sound sources as natural and artificial ones.
S.3.1.25. Observes the importance of sound intensity for hearing and figures out that human can not hear every sound clearly. It is emphasized sound intensity is a feature that provides hearing sound.
S.3.1.26. 1- Explains the connection between sound intensity and distance. It is not given mathematical connection between them.  2- Expresses that loud noise can cause hearing loss.
S.3.1.27. Classifies living creatures as animate or inanimate by using the examples in the environment. A.It is just mentioned plants and animals between species. B.It is paid attention to misconception in literature.
S.3.1.28. 1-Presents the results of observation of a plant's life cycle. 2-Monitoring of a plant during a certain period of development and the recording of observation results are expected.
S.3.1.29. 1.Recognize the environment for in live.Takes an active part in environmental cleanup lived.
S.3.1.30. 1.Explain the difference between natural and artificial environment.
S.3.1.31. 1.Design an artificial environment.
S.3.1.32. 1.Become aware of the importance of the natural environment for living. National parks and natural monuments referred to.2.Recommends doing research solutions for protecting the natural environment.
S.3.1.33. Explains the importance of electricity in daily life by giving examples from the vicinity of electrical tools.
S.3.1.34. Explains the importance of electricity in daily life by giving examples from the vicinity of electrical tools.


 