en,sci,4
4.1 Earth Crust and Earth Movements / Earth and Universe
key concepts: In this unit, the students will be able to recognize the rocks forming the structure of the Earth, to have an idea about the formation of fossils, to understand the movements of the Earth's rotation and entanglement, to be able to establish movement relations between the Sun and the Earth and the time periods associated with these movements (day-night, day-year) to acquire knowledge and skills about
4.1.1. Structure of the Earth Shell Recommended Duration: 6 hours
Subject / Concepts: Rock, fossil
4.1.1.1. It indicates that the black layer of the Earth's crust consists of rocks.
a) The classification of rocks is not entered.
4.1.1.2. Relate rocks with mines and discuss the importance of rocks as raw materials.
a) It is referred to many rocks and minerals in Turkey; gold, boron, marble, lignite, copper, hard coal, silver etc. examples are given.
4.1.1.3. Explains the formation of fossils.
a) Fossil types are not entered.
4.1.2. Movements of Our World Recommended duration: 9 hours
Subject / Concepts: The results of the earth's rotation and entanglement movements, day-year, day and night
4.1.2.1. Explain the difference between the earth's rotating and twisting movements.
a) An example of daily life is given to the movement of swirling and entanglement.
4.1.2.2. Explains the events taking place as a result of the movements of the world.
a. The rotation of the Earth is referred to.
b. The movement of the earth is referred to.
c. Depending on the rotation of the Earth, the position of the Sun in the day is mentioned.
d. Day and night formation is mentioned.
e. Day, year, time concepts are given.
4.2. Our Food / Living Creatures and Life
key concepts: In this unit, the aim of this course is to create awareness about the nutritional varieties, healthy and balanced nutrition, harms of smoking and alcohol use, and benefits of healthy nutrition.
4.2.1. Food and Its Properties Recommended duration: 18 hours
Subject / Concepts: Food contents, water, minerals, food storage conditions, balanced nutrition, obesity, food wastage, smoking and alcohol
4.2.1.1. Explain the relationship between living and nutritional contents.
a. The importance of protein, carbohydrate, fat, vitamins, water and minerals is emphasized.
b. Vitamin varieties are not entered.
4.2.1.2. Makes the extraction of water and minerals in all foods.
4.2.1.3. Discusses the importance of freshness and naturalness of foods for a healthy life based on research data.
a) Concepts such as frozen foods, packaged foods, expiration date are emphasized. In addition, the attention of students is drawn to the issue of cleaning of food.
4.2.1.4. Relate human health with balanced nutrition.
a) The relationship between obesity and eating habits is emphasized. Attention is paid to avoiding food waste.
4.2.1.5. Realizes the negative effects of alcohol and smoking on human health.
4.2.1.6. It takes responsibility to reduce smoking in its immediate vicinity.
a) It is expected that people around her will be warned that smoking is harmful to health.
4.3. Effects of Force / Physical Events
a) In this unit, students are expected to realize the effects of force on objects, to understand the basic properties of magnets and to discover places where they are used.
4.3.1. The Effects of Force on Objects Recommended duration: 6 hours
Subject / concepts: Accelerating effect of force, decelerating effect of force, directing effect of force, shaping effect of force.
4.3.1.1. Experiments to force the body to move and change the shape of the object makes experiments.
4.3.2. Force Applied by Magnets Recommended duration: 6 hours
Subject / Concepts: Magnets, magnets of magnets, usage areas of magnets
4.3.2.1. Recognizes the magnet and discovers the poles.
4.3.2.2. He / she discovers the effects of the magnet by experiment.
a) It is emphasized that the force applied by the magnet does not require contact other than the forces requiring contact.
4.3.2.3. It gives examples of the usage areas of magnets in daily life
4.3.2.4. Explains the ideas of magnets on new uses.
4.4. Properties / Matter and Nature of Matter
key concepts: In this unit, students can learn the matter through sensory organs; water swim and ingestion, absorbing water, not absorbing and attracting with magnet; to define the concept of matter in terms of mass and volume concepts. Comparison of solids, liquids and gaseous states in terms of fluidity, mobility and the shape of the container they are in. They also explain the melting and freezing phenomena as a result of heat effects, and the classifying of the substance as pure and mixture in two groups and sieving various mixtures that are frequently encountered in daily life are intended to be separated by filtration and drawing by magnet.
4.4.1. Specifications that define the structure Recommended duration: 3 hours
Subject / Concepts: Swimming and stinging in water, absorption and absorption of water and withdrawal with magnet
4.4.1.1. Explains the basic properties that characterize the substance by using the five senses organs.
a) What characterizes matter; Water absorption and absorption, absorption and absorption of water and magnet withdrawal properties such as the processing of the subject is provided to use the sense organs.
4.4.2. Measurable properties of matter Recommended duration: 3 hours Subject / Concepts: Mass, volume
4.4.2.1. Compares the mass and volume of different substances.
a) Masses and volumes of gases are not entered.
4.4.2.2. Defines the substance by using its measurable properties.
a) It is stated that assets with mass and volume are substances.
4.4.3. States of matter Recommended duration: 5 hours Subject / Concepts: Solid, liquid, gas
4.4.3.1. Compares the basic properties of the state of matter.
a) No granular and hollow structure is entered.
4.4.3.2. Gives examples of the same substance's different states.
4.4.4. Change of Matter with Heat Effect Recommended duration: 4 hours
Subject / Concepts: Warming, cooling, change of state, melting, freezing, evaporation
4.4.4.1. Designs experiments to heat and cool substances.
4.4.4.2. Designs experiments that the materials can change the effect of heat.
a) Melt changes, melting, freezing and evaporation are mentioned only.
4.4.5. Pure Substance and Mixture Recommended duration: 6 hours
Subject / Concepts: Pure material, mixture, sieving, filtering and separation methods
4.4.5.1. Explain the differences between the substances used frequently in daily life by classifying as pure substance and mixture.
4.4.5.2. He selects the appropriate methods for separating the mixtures he encounters in his daily life. Screening, filtering and separation methods with magnet are emphasized.
4.4.5.3. Discusses the separation of mixtures in terms of their contribution to the national economy and the effective use of resources.
4.5. Lighting and Sound Technologies / Physical Events
key concepts: In this unit, students know that various technologies that affect environment, society and people related to sound and lighting are developing; understand that when appropriate use of light can contribute to family budget and national economy; In addition, they are expected to design future lighting systems, thus gaining creative and innovative thinking skills.
4.5.1. Lighting Technologies Recommended duration: 5 hours
Subject / Concepts: Lighting technologies from the past to the present, the importance of lighting tools
4.5.1.1. Compares the lighting tools used in the past and present.
a. The contribution of technology to the development of lighting tools is emphasized, chronological order and detail is not given.
b. The importance of lighting tools in our lives is emphasized.
4.5.1.2. Designs for future lighting tools.
a) Design is asked to express by drawing, three-dimensional design is not entered.
4.5.2. Suitable Lighting Recommended duration: 3 hours
Subject / Concepts: Appropriate lighting and its importance, efficient use of lighting tools
4.5.2.1. Do research about appropriate lighting.
a) The importance of appropriate lighting for eye health is emphasized.
4.5.2.2. Discuss the importance of the economical use of lighting tools in terms of family and country economy.
4.5.3. Light pollution Recommended duration: 5 hours
Subject / Concepts: Light pollution and its negative effects, what to do to prevent light pollution 4.5.3.1. Question the causes of light pollution.
4.5.3.2. Explains the negative effects of light pollution on natural life and the observation of celestial bodies.
4.5.3.3. Produces solutions to reduce light pollution.
4.5.4. Audio Technologies From Past to Present Recommended duration: 3 hours
Subject / Concepts: Technologies to change the volume, technologies to improve our hearing, sound recording technologies
4.5.4.1. Compares the audio technologies used in the past and present.
a. The contribution of technology to the development of audio tools is emphasized, chronological order and detail is not given.
b. Technologies that help to change the volume, improve our hearing and record sound are emphasized.
4.5.4.2. Investigate the positive and negative effects of technological tools with severe voice.
4.5.5. Sound Pollution Recommended duration: 5 hours
Subject / Concepts: Sound pollution and its negative effects, what to do to prevent noise pollution
4.5.5.1. Question the causes of noise pollution.
4.5.5.2. Explains the negative effects of noise pollution on human health and environment.
4.5.5.3. Produces solutions to reduce noise pollution.
4.6. Human and Environment / Creatures and Life
a) The aim of this unit is to enable the students to acquire the necessary resources for life and the knowledge and skills related to the efficient use of resources.
4.6.1. Conscious consumers Recommended duration: 6 hours
Subject / Concepts: Resource usage, saving, stamina, recycling
4.6.1.1. It takes care to be efficient in the use of resources.
a. The importance of the use of resources such as electricity, water and food is emphasized.
b. The importance of reuse is emphasized.
4.6.1.2. Realizes the importance of resources and recycling for life.
a) Sources such as water, food and electricity are mentioned.
4.7. Simple Electric Circuits / Physical Events
key concepts: The aim of this unit is to provide the students with a simple electrical circuit by recognizing the circuit elements and to associate the electrical systems and simple electrical circuits in the home.
4.7.1. Simple Electric Circuits Recommended duration: 6 hours
Subject / Concepts: Circuit elements, simple electrical circuit installation
4.7.1.1. Recognize the circuit elements that make up the simple electrical circuit with their functions.
a) As a circuit element, the battery, bulb, cable and switch are introduced.
4.7.1.2. It establishes a working electrical circuit.
a) A circuit consisting of bulb, battery and switch is requested.
4.7.1.3. Knows that electrical switches and cables at home and school are circuit components.
a) It is emphasized that between the switches and the lamps there are connection cables passing through the wall