en,mat,4
4.1 NUMBERS AND OPERATIONS
4.1.1. Natural Numbers
Terms or Concepts: maniple
4.1.1.1. Reads and writes natural numbers of 4, 5 and 6 digits.
4.1.1.2. Floats and rides up to 10.000 (including 10.000).
4.1.1.3. 4, 5 and 6-digit numbers and steps of natural numbers, the digits of the digits of the digits and determines the number of digits.
a) Rounds natural numbers to the nearest decimal or to the face. Up to four digit numbers are used.
4.1.1.5. Sorts up to six digits using the big / small symbol.
4.1.1.6. Creates increasing or decreasing number patterns according to a certain rule and explains the rule.
a) Associates each term (element) in an ascending or descending pattern with the number of steps. For example 2, 5, 8,11,… in the pattern of the first term 2, such as the second term 5.
b) The difference between them is limited to the number of constant patterns.
4.1.2. Collecting Process with Natural Numbers
4.1.2.1. It performs the collection with up to four digits natural numbers.
4.1.2.2. Estimates the sum of two natural numbers and compares their estimation with the process result.
a) The totals are traded with up to four digit numbers.
4.1.2.3. It collects up to four digits of natural numbers in multiples of 100.
a) It is ensured that the totals to be obtained have a maximum of four digits.
4.1.2.4. Solves the problems that require collection with natural numbers.
a) In problem solving activities, problems that require a maximum of four operations are included.
b) The studies aiming to establish the problems requiring maximum three procedures are also included.
4.1.3. Extraction with Natural Numbers
4.1.3.1. Performs extraction with up to four digits of natural numbers.
4.1.3.2. The three-digit natural numbers are two-tier natural numbers, and the three-digit natural numbers, which are 100 times solid, are out of the mind.
4.1.3.3. Estimates the result of the extraction with natural numbers, compares its estimation with the process result.
4.1.3.4. Solves problems that require addition and subtraction with natural numbers.
a) In problem solving activities, problems that require a maximum of four operations are included.
b) Problem-creating studies that require a maximum of three procedures are also included.
4.1.4. Multiplication with Natural Numbers
4.1.4.1 Three-digit natural numbers multiply two-digit natural numbers.
4.1.4.2. It shows that changing the order of multiplication of numbers by three natural numbers does not change the result.
Examples of brackets are included in the operations.
4.1.4.3. Natural numbers with maximum three-digit natural numbers are 10, 100 and 1000 times the maximum; the most two-digit natural numbers multiply by 5, 25 and 50.
4.1.4.4. The maximum number of three digits multiplies by 10, 100 and 1000.
4.1.4.5. Estimates the multiplication of a natural number with a two-digit natural number and a natural number and compares its estimation with the result of the process.
4.1.4.6. Solves problems that require multiplication with natural numbers.
a) Working with up to three process problems.
b) Studies on problem building are also included.
4.1.5. Division with Natural Numbers Symbols: Semb
4.1.5.1. It divides the three-digit natural numbers by two-digit natural numbers.
a) The relationship between the divided and the number of digits between the sections is noticed.
b) By determining the number of steps of the section in the division process without processing, the accuracy of the process is checked.
4.1.5.2. Divides a number of up to four digits into one digit.
4.1.5.3. The last three digits divide the natural numbers from zero to ten, 100 and 1000 into zero.
4.1.5.4. Estimates the outcome of a division operation and compare its prediction with the result of the transaction.
4.1.5.5. Realize the relationship between multiplication and division.
4.1.5.6. Solves problems that require at least one division with natural numbers.
a) When solving the problem, a maximum of three problems are studied.
b) Problem-creating studies that require a maximum of two operations are also included.
4.1.5.7. It determines the value which is not given in one of the two mathematical expressions with equality status between them and explains that equality is ensured.
a) For example:  8  +	= 15 - 3; 12  :   4	=	+ 1; 6	x   = 48 - 12
4.1.5.8. Explains the procedures to be done in order to be equal to two mathematical expressions between them.
a) For example, on the expression of “8 + 5 not equal to 12-3”, it is emphasized the processes that can be done to achieve equality.
4.1.6. Fractions
Terms and Concepts: simple fraction, compound fraction, integer fraction
4.1.6.1. Identifies simple, compound and integer fraction and models.
a) It is emphasized that the reading can vary according to the different meanings of the fraction.
b) Naming studies are carried out using models (number line, area model, etc.).
4.1.6.2. Compares and sorts the unit fractions.
a) Fractions with a maximum of 20 are studied.
b) The sizes of unit fractions represent the appropriate models.
4.1.6.3. Specifies a simple fraction of a specified multiplicity.
a) A simple fraction of a plurality of a simple fraction of the work begins with the model, then the process is made.
b) The number indicating the multitude must be at most three digits.
c) The multiplication of the fraction with the natural number is not allowed.
4.1.6.4. It compares up to three fractions with equal values.
a) While making comparison studies, models such as length, area and number line are used.
b) When comparing, symbols are used.
c) Zero, half and full comparison studies are given on a given fraction number line.
4.1.7. Operations with Fractions
4.1.7.1. Makes adding and subtracting the shares with equal fractions.
4.1.7.2. Solve problems that require addition and subtraction with fractions.
4.2. GEOMETRY
4.2.1. Geometric objects and shapes
4.2.1.1. Name the edges and corners of the triangle, square and rectangle.
4.2.1.2. Determines the edge properties of square and rectangle.
4.2.1.3. Classifies triangles according to edge lengths.
4.2.1.4. Creates the given cube.
4.2.1.5. Isometric or squared paper is drawn with identical cubes.
4.2.2. Spatial Relations
Terms or concepts: mirror symmetry
4.2.2.1. Explains the symmetry of the symmetry by explaining the mirror symmetry on geometric shapes and models.
a) Butterfly's wings, flowers, leaves, fabric, rug patterns, letters and so on. models are placed on the appropriate places in the mirror by observing the identical parts of these objects are realized. It is emphasized that such symmetry is called ”mirror symmetry göre or” symmetry by mirror “or” symmetry by right Bu.
4.2.2.2. Draws the symmetry of the given shape according to the correct.
4.2.3. Basic Concepts in Geometry
Terms or concepts: plane, narrow angle, right angle, wide angle, right angle
4.2.3.1. Recognizes and exemplifies the plane.
4.2.3.2. It determines the rays and the corner that make up the angle, denotes the angle and shows them with the symbol.
4.2.3.3. Measures angles with non-standard units and explains the necessity of standard measurement units.
4.2.3.4. Measures angles by means of standard angle measuring tools, which are narrow, vertical, wide and right angles.
a) The reference is made by reference to the right angle.
b) When examining the wide angle models, it is important not to be larger than the right angle.
4.2.3.5. Using the standard angle measuring tools, it forms the given angle.
a) It is realized that the angle is formed by turning the angle around the starting point of a beam with the help of the means (conductor, miter, etc.).
b) It is emphasized that the difference in the postures of angles with the same dimensions is not effective in the extent of the angle.
4.3. MEASUREMENT
4.3.1. Length Measuring
Terms and concepts: millimeter (mm)
4.3.1.1. Indicates the usage area of the millimeter from the standard length measurement units.
4.3.1.2. Explains the relationships between the units of measurement of length and write in terms of one  another.
a) Millimeters-centimeters, centimeters-meters and meters-kilometers are limited to binary conversions.
b) Conversions that require the use of decimal notation are not made.
4.3.1.3. It estimates a length that it can measure directly with the most appropriate length measurement unit and checks it by measuring its estimation.
No mileage is performed.
4.3.1.4. Solves problems that require a maximum of three operations using length measurement units.
4.3.2. Environmental Measurement
4.3.2.1. Explains the relationship between the circumference lengths of the square and rectangle and edge lengths.
a) The environment and the length of the edge of the given rectangle or the length of the edge of the given square to find the length of the activity of the relationship between the environment and edge lengths are examined.
b) It is found that the perimeter of a square is four times the length of one side.
c) In such studies, the work shall be carried out by using checkered or dotted paper (by associating with the number of units).
4.3.2.2. Creates different geometric shapes with the same perimeter.
a) Activities are carried out using dot or isometric paper.
4.3.2.3. Solves the problems related to the calculation of the circumference of the shapes.
a) Circumference is not placed around the circle.
b) Studies on problem building are also included.
4.3.3. Area Measurement
4.3.3.1. It determines that the areas of the shapes are the number of unit squares covering this area.
a) In addition to the recognized shapes, the leaf drawn on the square paper is also worked with indented shapes.
b) While giving examples, studies are carried out on different shapes and perimeter lengths.
4.3.3.2. Associates the area of the square and rectangle with the addition and multiplication operations.
a) Calculates the areas of square and rectangle by counting unit squares.
b) Area calculation studies are performed by counting, repeating and multiplication operations.
c) In the course of these studies, row-column relation is used.
4.3.4. Measuring Time
Terms or concepts: hours (hr.), Minutes (min), seconds (sec)
4.3.4.1. Explains the relationship between time measurement units.
a) Conversions between hour-minute, minute-second are done.
b) Conversions between year-month-week, month-week-day are made.
c) When making the conversion, the subject of the year is also mentioned.
4.3.4.2. Solves problems using time measurement units.
a) The importance of time management in problems is emphasized.
b) Studies on problem building are also included.
4.3.5. Weighing
Terms or concepts: ton (t), milligrams (mg)
4.3.5.1. It refers to half and quarter kilograms in grams.
4.3.5.2. Kilogram and grams use together when measuring mass.
4.3.5.3. Determines where tons and milligrams are used.
a) An abbreviation of the tone and milligrams is shown.
4.3.5.4. Ton-kilogram, kilogram-gram, grams-milligrams explains the relationship between each other and converts.
a) Conversions that do not require a decimal display are made.
4.3.5.5. Solve problems related to tons, kilograms, grams and milligrams.
a) Studies on problem building are also included.
4.3.6. Liquid Measuring
Terms or concepts: milliliters (mL)
4.3.6.1. Explains the places where milliliters are used.
Examples of places and situations most commonly used in everyday life.
4.3.6.2. Explains the relationship between liters and milliliters and transforms each other.
a) Decimal not used.
4.3.6.3. It uses a combination of liters and milliliters.
a) Activities are carried out using models. For example, 1 cup of water is expressed as 200 mL, 6 cups of water as 1 liter 200 mL.
b) Decimal notation is used.
c) The subject of saving is mentioned.
4.3.6.4. Estimates the amount of liquid in a container with units of liters and milliliters and controls its estimation.
4.3.6.5. Solve problems with liters and milliliters.
Studies on problem building are also included.
4.4. DATA PROCESSING
4.4.1. Data Collecting and Evaluation Terms or concepts: column chart
4.4.1.1. Analyzes the column graph, makes comments and estimates on the chart.
4.4.1.2. Creates a column graph.
a) Before the column graph is created, the data is organized using the object or shape graph. The scoreboard and frequency tables can also be used. In the first studies, checkered paper and colored units can be used.
4.4.1.3. Uses different representations to present the obtained data.
a) Horizontal or vertical column graphs, shape graphs, object graphs, tables, tree schemes, etc. are used as different impressions.
b) During the data collection, attention shall be paid to the appropriate level of work.
c) It is discussed whether the subject or problem chosen during the data collection process is suitable for collecting data.
ç) Students are informed about the tables and graphical representations that the students have learned up to this stage.
d) Graphic titles and units suitable for data are used.
e) The use of different graphic representations suitable for the data (such as gender, eye color) and sequencing (such as height order, competition results) and the determination of the appropriate representation is ensured.
f) Two or more features are used.
g) Information and communication technologies can be used.
h) The relationship between savings awareness and financial literacy is established by using different representations of the data.
4.4.1.4. Solves problems with everyday life using the information shown in the column chart, tables and other graphics.
a) Studies on problem building are also included.