en,mat,3
3.1 NUMBERS AND OPERATIONS
3.1.1. Natural Numbers
Terms or Concepts: digit, digit value, percentage, odd number, even number
Symbols: >, <
3.1.1.1. Reads and writes three-digit natural numbers.
a) Firstly, three-digit numbers are used by using models.
3.1.1.2. Starting from any number within 1000, it counts rhythmically, forward and floating forward.
3.1.1.3. Specifies the step names of the three-digit natural numbers and the digit values of the digits in the digits.
3.1.1.4. It rounds up the three-digit natural numbers to the nearest decimal or to the face.
3.1.1.5. Compares up to five natural numbers less than 1000 and sorts them using symbols.
3.1.1.6. In 100, six, seven, eight and nine counts rhythmic.
3.1.1.7. The difference between them expands and creates the constant number pattern.
a) The pattern is expanded by a maximum of four steps.
b) Modeling studies are carried out according to the pattern.
3.1.1.8. Comprehend single and double natural numbers.
a) Real objects are used when working with single and double natural numbers.
3.1.1.9. Examines the sum of single and double natural numbers on the model and indicates whether the totals are single or double.
3.1.1.10. Reads and writes Roman numerals up to 20.
a) In addition to Roman numerals, the number symbols used by ancient civilizations are introduced with examples from the history of mathematics in order to ensure that students are attracted to mathematics.
3.1.2. Collecting Process with Natural Numbers
3.1.2.1. Performs unattended and manual collection with up to three digit numbers.
3.1.2.2. It shows that changing the order of the numbers with each other does not change the result in the collection operation with three natural numbers.
a) Samples with parentheses should also be included in the operations.
3.1.2.3. Estimates the sum of the two numbers and compares the estimation with the process result.
a) Develop estimation strategies using rounding, number pairs and step values.
3.1.2.4. Collects from the mind.
a) Two two-digit numbers whose sums do not exceed 100; a three-digit number is a one-digit number, a two-digit number which is a multiple of 10, and a three-digit number, which is a multiple of 100, is gathered.
b) Appropriate strategies are used such as rounding, number pairs, step values, insertion on top, shredding numbers.
3.1.2.5. Finds a collection that is not given in a collection operation.
a) In the collection process containing more than two terms, it is done to find the collection which is not given.
b) The maximum number of untreated process samples should be used in the collection process with natural numbers.
3.1.2.6. Solve the problems that require collection with natural numbers.
a) When solving the problem, problems that require a maximum of three operations are included.
b) Problem-creating studies that require a maximum of two operations are also included.
3.1.3. Extraction with Natural Numbers
3.1.3.1. Ten decimals and require no subtraction.
a) Class numbers remain within the limits.
3.1.3.2. The two-digit numbers, two-digit numbers, which are 10-fold, subtract from the two-digit natural numbers, which are more than 10 times the number of natural numbers, which are the three-digit 100-fold.
Mind-processing strategies such as inserting, shredding numbers are used.
3.1.3.3. Estimates the result of the extraction with natural numbers, compares its estimation with the process result.
a) Class numbers remain within the limits.
3.1.3.4. Solves problems that require addition and subtraction with natural numbers.
a) When solving the problem, it is limited to three processes.
b) Problem-creating studies that require a maximum of two operations are also included.
3.1.4. Multiplication with Natural Numbers
3.1.4.1. Explains the meaning of multiplication.
a) The relation of the meaning of multiplication with the meaning of repetitive collection is emphasized.
3.1.4.2. Creates the multiplication table.
a) By using the table in the form of a list of 100 and form a multiplication table is provided to create.
3.1.4.3. With a two-digit natural number, a natural number multiplies a two-digit natural number, a natural number with a three-digit natural number.
a) Including the multiplication operations.
b) Products with numbers less than 1000 are traded.
3.1.4.4. 10 and 100 with a short-way multiplication.
a) Class numbers remain within the limits.
3.1.4.5. Using the numbers in the multiplication table up to 5 (including 5), you notice how the result of the multiplication has changed when one of the multiplications is multiplied or reduced.
a) It is noticed that by multiplying one of the multipliers by one of the multipliers by using one of the multiplier, the multiplier decreases by another multiplier by one of the multiplier.
3.1.4.6. Solves problems that require two operations, one of which is multiplication. Studies on problem building are also included.
3.1.5. Division with Natural Numbers
Terms or concepts: remaining
3.1.5.1. Divides natural numbers into two-digit natural numbers.
a) It is emphasized that the process should start from the largest step, unlike other operations in the division process.
b) Specifies that the process will not continue if the remaining part of the division operation is smaller than the region.
c) In addition to modeling with concrete objects, number line etc. The models are also used.
3.1.5.2. The first digit divides a two-digit natural number, which is zero, by a shorter path than 10.
3.1.5.3. Understands the relationship between division, division, division and remainder in division process.
a) In the division process, the division is represented by modeling and operations where the division and division product are equal to the remaining and the sum.
3.1.5.4. Solve problems that require two operations, one of which is a partition.
a) Studies on problem building are also included.
3.1.6. Fraction
Terms and Concepts: fraction, numerator, denominator, fractional line, unit fraction
3.1.6.1. Uses fractional representations of all, half and quarter models.
a) In the reading of fractional representations, expressions that emphasize the part-whole relationship are used. For example, the 1/4 fraction is read in the form of as a quarter and is described as a whole divided by 4 and a part taken.
b) Shares are explained on the denominator using the denominator and fractional line.
3.1.6.2. Specifies that each of the peer parts is a unit fraction by dividing a whole into peer parts.
a) It is emphasized that the whole is ”1a”
b) It is explained that one of the peer parts of the given whole is a unit fraction.
3.1.6.3. Explains the relationship between share and denominator.
a) The part-whole relationship between share and denominator is highlighted.
3.1.6.4. Denotes unit fractions of fractions 10 and 100.
a) The denominations 10 are denoted on the number line as well as the other models (length, area, etc.).
3.1.6.5. Specifies a multiplicity, as much as the specified unit fraction.
a) The problem is solved by using the model. Then the operation is done.
3.1.6.6. Shares obtains small fractions from the denominator.
a) Paper, fraction blocks, pattern blocks and number lines should be used with various fractions using fractional fraction.
3.2. GEOMETRY
3.2.1. Geometric objects and shapes
Terms and Concepts: rectangle, pentagon, hexagon, octagon, diagonal, rectangle, face, cone
3.2.1.1. Cube, square prism, rectangular prism, triangular prism, cylinder, cone and sphere models, faces, corners, specifies the edges.
3.2.1.1. Cube, square prism and rectangular prism explain the similar and different aspects of each other.
a) A comparison is made in terms of corner, face and edge properties.
b) It is not mentioned that the cube and square prism and the rectangular prism have special status.
3.2.1.3. Draws the square, rectangle and triangle using the ruler; determine the diagonal of the square and rectangle.
a) Dotted, isometric or square paper is used for drawing.
b) It is realized that the triangle has no diagonal.
3.2.1.4. They realize that the figures are named according to the number of edges.
a) Quadrangle, pentagon, hexagon and octagon are introduced.
b) Examples from daily life to the figures (honeycomb, opened envelope, traffic signs, etc.) are given.
c) Figures; dot paper, geometry board, etc. shown on vehicles.
3.2.2. Spatial Relations
Terms or concepts: symmetry
3.2.2.1. It determines whether the shapes have more than one symmetry line.
a) It is limited to square, rectangle and circle.
b) It is realized that the rectangle is not a symmetry line in the rectangle.
3.2.2.2. One part completes the given symmetrical shape according to the vertical or horizontal symmetry line.
a) It is ensured that the parts of the symmetrical shape are examined, associated and the properties of the peer parts are recognized.
3.2.3. Geometric Patterns
3.2.3.1. She makes coating using shape models, draws the coating pattern she makes on dotted or checkered paper.
a) The unit is used in triangle, square, rectangular shape models.
3.2.4. Basic Concepts in Geometry
Terms or concepts: point, line, line, line, angle
3.2.4.1. Recognizes the point, shows the symbol and name it.
3.2.4.2. Recognize the truth, beam and angle.
a) Describes the truth and the beam and gives examples from its surroundings.
3.2.4.3. Creates the correct piece with line models; horizontal, vertical and inclined position to give examples of accurate part models.
3.3. MEASURING
3.3.1. Length Measuring
Terms or concepts: kilometers (km)
3.3.1.1. Defines non-standard measuring tools for one meter, half meter, 10 cm and 5 cm and measures using them.
a) The students are asked to define physical measurement tools such as strokes, pitches, chunks and non-bodily measuring tools such as rope, wire, pencil and different measurement activities by using them.
3.3.1.2. Explain the relationship between meter and centimeter and write in terms of each other.
a) Numbers that do not require decimal notation are used in conversions.
b) Transformations are carried out with concrete applications.
3.3.1.3. Using the ruler draws a given part of the length of the given length.
3.3.1.4. Recognizes the kilometer, indicates the usage areas and notices the relationship between kilometers and meters.
a) Inter-unit conversions are not included.
3.3.1.5. Solves the problems using meter and centimeter units.
a) When solving the problem, there are two problems with most processes.
3.3.2. Environmental Measurement Terms or concepts: environment
3.3.2.1. Determines the environment of objects.
3.3.2.2. Measures the circumference of the shapes using non-standard and standard units.
a) First, non-standard units are measured.
b) It is emphasized that a shape should not measure the same edges repeatedly when measuring the circumference and should not have any unmetered edges.
3.3.2.3. Calculates the perimeter of the shapes.
a) Geometry, dotted or square paper given in the square, rectangle, or created from a combination of the length of the environment are calculated.
b) The circumference of the circle is not calculated.
3.3.2.4. Solves problems related to the circumference of the shapes.
3.3.3. Area Measurement
Terms or concepts: field
3.3.3.1. Measures and measures the area of the figures with non-standard materials.
a) Colored paper, plastic, etc., of equal size as coating material. Material can be used. Particular attention is paid to the surface of the surface to be coated.
b) The number of units and the importance of unit repetition in area measurement are highlighted.
c) The students are given the works to tell the number of units.
ç) Studies are carried out to measure and compare the areas of two different shapes with non-standard units of the same type.
3.3.3.2. Estimates an area with non-standard field measurement units and controls the estimate by counting units.
3.3.4. Our money
3.3.4.1. Shows the relationship between pound and penny.
a) For example 325 cents, 3 pounds is expressed as 25 cents.
b) Decimal representation is not included.
3.3.4.2. Solves problems with our money.
a) Emphasis on the importance of savings in problems.
b) Studies on problem building are also included.
3.3.5. Measuring Time
Terms or concepts: in seconds
3.3.5.1. Tells, reads and writes time in minutes and hours.
3.3.5.2. Explain the relationship between time measurement units.
a) Explains the relationship between year-week, year-day, minute-second.
b) Conversion operations are not entered.
3.3.5.3. Compares the occurrence time of events.
a) Measurement and comparison of the duration of tasks between the beginning of a particular job or action and its completion.
b) Examples of the use of different time measurement tools such as hourglass are also included.
3.3.5.4. Solves problems using time measurement units.
3.3.6. Weighing
Terms or concepts: gram (g)
3.3.6.1. Measures objects in grams and kilograms.
3.3.6.2. Estimates the mass of an object and checks its accuracy by measuring.
3.3.6.3. Solves problems related to kilograms and grams.
a) Problems requiring conversion are not included.
b) Studies on problem building are also included.
3.3.7. Liquid Measuring
Terms or concepts: liters (L)
3.3.7.1. Explains the necessity of standard liquid measuring instruments and units and makes measurements with liter or half liter units.
3.3.7.2. Estimates the amount of liquid in a container with liters and half liter units and checks the accuracy of the measurement by measuring.
3.3.7.3. Solve problems related to liters.
3.4. DATA PROCESSING
3.4.1. Data Collecting and Evaluation
3.4.1.1. Makes and interprets conversions from chart to scoreboard and frequency table by explaining the information shown in figure and object graph.
a) They are asked to comment on the whole of the data by comparing different parts of the data. For example, when a graph showing the number of bread sold in a week in a grocery store is examined, it is noticed that the number of bread sold at the weekend is more than the number of bread sold on other days.
3.4.1.2. Solve problems that require addition and subtraction by using the information given in the graphs or by creating graphs.
a) Grade number limits remain.
b) Problems that require comparison are included.
c) Studies on problem building are also included.
3.4.1.3. Reads, reviews and arranges the data obtained from the tables.